Iman Khan joins us now live from am man
in Jordan because Israel has shut down
alzer's operations in Israel so we're
reporting from outside the country Imran
look listening to these comments I guess
they show just how strained relations
are right now between Egypt and Israel
right that's absolutely right these
comments come from uh president CCE
after the Israeli Prime Minister
Benjamin Netanyahu publicly said that uh
The rafha Crossing could open but Egypt
didn't want to open it now Egypt and
Israel have a very complicated security
relationship um agreement the beginnings
of that were Camp David which was set up
in uh 1979 the Accords that were signed
out C David when specifically talking
about Rafa meant that Rafa should be
demilitarized and Palestinians should be
in control of the Gaza side of the
crossing one clearly those two things
are not happening president cc is also
uh saying effectively uh to the Israelis
that you are in Gaza you've created this
mess this is and isn't on us but you
also have to remember uh the Egyptians
are under a tremendous amount of
domestic pressure as well the war is
incredibly unpopular amongst the
Egyptian public so that's something that
CCE will be looking at be looking at the
voices of the streets uh that will be
hearing any capitulation any agreement
with Israel is going to be incredibly
popular unpopular so that all plays into
why we've heard these comments come out
so far but like I say uh we haven't had
any Israeli reaction so far but it's
likely that we're going to hear
something that we've heard before
particularly from prime minister
Benjamin Netanyahu who intends to
deflect and blame the Egyptians for not
letting in that humanitarian Aid now the
Egyptians are actually fighting back in
this it seemingly those very angry words
are the beginning of that fight back
against these isra
accusations thanks to Imran Khan
following the situation from a man in
Jordan and a reminder that he's there
covering this story because Israel has
banned Al jazer operating inside Israel
now let's bring in M Rabani in Montreal
he's the Middle East analyst and
co-editor of the online magazine Jalia
good to have you with us first of all M
maybe be useful to kind of step back a
second and remind viewers of what the
previous agreements say about who
manages the Rafa Crossing agreements
like the 2005 Philadelphia
agreement yes it's the 2005 agreement on
movement and access which was um reached
through I believe us mediation after
Israel um disengaged from the Gaza Strip
and it's specified that um Palestinian
Authority in conjunction with European
Union Union monitors would be
responsible for the um uh Palestinian
side of the crossing this was basically
an indirect way I think of of
maintaining Israeli control over that
Crossing and then what happened in 2005
uh sorry 2007 when Hamas seized power in
the Gaza Strip um the Europeans took a
unilateral decision to leave um The
Crossing and Egypt used that as a
pretext to cooperate with Israel's
blockade of the Gaza Strip I think
what's happened now is with Israel so
brazenly taking over um the ra Crossing
they have exposed Egyptian complicity
with Israeli policy towards a Gaza Strip
beyond the point um to which the Israel
the Egyptian leadership can bear and as
Imran Khan was pointing out it also has
to do with Egyptian domestic um uh
opposition to the war in Gaza there may
well also be powerful forces within um
the Egyptian ruling establishment and
particularly the security establishment
who are not too happy at the way the
Egyptian um uh government has been
cooperating with Israel during um the
past uh8 months or so and it's in that
context that we need to see um the
Egyptian lead leadership now taking a
more public and forceful position of
opposition to what Israel is doing all
right so given what you're saying how
series of a rift is really going on
between Egypt and Israel then is this
just maneuvering or posturing for
domestic consumption in
Egypt well there's certainly posturing
involved but I think it would be
mistaken um to see this as as merely
playing to the gallery for um cosmetic
uh purposes if will it is it is a very
serious issue inside Egypt and that
almost by definition makes it a serious
issue for the Egyptian um uh leadership
and there's there's a broader issue here
rather than just the details of the
agreements which is um Egypt has a
Central National Security principle
which is that it will refuse to take
responsibility for the Gaza Strip and
the Palestinians in the Gaza Strip uh
from Israel in the ABS of a
comprehensive political settlement
Israel has for years been trying to
shove off the Gaza Strip to Egypt and by
closing um uh their side of the border
and saying that Egypt should be the one
um responsible solely responsible for
the entry of Aid into the Gaza Strip I
think many in the Egyptian leadership
see this as kind of a
surreptitious um uh initiative to um try
to have the Egyptians take
responsibility for Gaza through through
yet another maneuver and they're simply
refusing this what position is the US
taking because as you mentioned the us
brok at some of these agreements whether
we're talking about the Philadelphia or
the Camp
David well the US is acting as a us
always does in such situations namely
that it's exercising pressure on Egypt
um to um go along with Israel's demands
and it's using the dire humanitarian
crisis in the Gaza Strip as a pretext so
once again instead of placing pressure
on those responsible for creating the
crisis namely the Israelis it's taking
the Israelis under its wing protecting
them and putting um pressure on Egypt to
go along with Israeli demands it's
entirely what one would expect um given
what we know about us
policy Wayne Rani good to talk to you
thanks so
much thank
you make sure to subscribe to our
Channel to get the latest news from Al
jazer